Hello everyone and welcome back to season 14 of the Great Roman Artists podcast. I'm so thrilled to be bringing you a fantastic series featuring conversations with artists, writers, curators and more. Just before I introduce our sponsor, I am very excited to let you know that I have written a new book. How to Live an Artful Life is out on the 6th of November 2025 and features a quote by an artist or writer for every day of the year. In the book, they offer us advice from how to slow down and pay attention to daily routines and putting ideas into action. Each month takes on a different theme. For example, January is about where do ideas come from, February is all about love and passion, August is about November is about memory, December is about joy. Because in a world where it seems that so many of us forget to look anymore, we can learn from those who do. And to help the reader feel like they can apply the artist's words to their life, I've written a short response to each entry to help guide and inspire you throughout the year. And I've linked to where you can pre-order it from in the show notes. And now for our sponsor. I am thrilled to say that this series is supported by the Levitt Collection, a vast and varied art collection, which in the last eight years has become entirely focused on works by women artists. You can find much of this made up of impressionists, abstract expressionists, contemporary artists and more at Femme in Mujan, France, the first private museum in mainland Europe devoted entirely to female artists, spearheaded by Christian Levitt, who has published three research books in this area. Recently, they launched the Levitt Letter, a monthly subscription based letter advising collectors and dealers on the future trends in this specific art market. Subscribers to the Levitt Letter also become members of the Levitt Lounge, a community where Christian shares his valuable insights and expertise and gives subscribers direct access to visiting Levitt's home in Florence and Mujan and the monthly webinar. Across all of these platforms, Levitt is shining a spotlight on the creative brilliance of women who have helped shape art history, from Burt Morisseau to Joan Mitchell. To learn more and subscribe to the Levitt Letter and Lounge, just head to www.thelevittletter.com. You can also purchase the three books and plan your visit to Femme at www.famm.com. I hope you enjoy this episode. Hello everyone and welcome to The Great Women Artists podcast with me, Katie Hessell. Some of you might know me from The Great Women Artists, an Instagram account I set up in October 2015, which celebrates female artists on a daily basis ranging from young graduates to old masters. Well, in a similar fashion to the Instagram, this podcast is all about celebrating female artists from a variety of backgrounds and histories. And I'm so excited to be interviewing artists on their career or artists, writers, curators, or general art lovers on the women artist who means most of them. What I want this podcast to do is celebrate female artists in all different capacities, so you, the listener, can gain a look into the greatest female artists working now or from art history. I'm so excited to say that my guest on The Great Women Artists podcast is the esteemed curator, author, and expert in photography, Magda Keeney. Currently the head curator of international art at the National Gallery of Art, Canberra, Magda was most recently curator at the National Portrait Gallery, Canberra, and before that, senior curator in photographs at the National Portrait Gallery in London, where she led the realization of a major re-presentation of the photographs collection as part of the museum's re-haul. She has curated shows and published text on Australian art, design, and social history, photography that ranges from the Victorian period to fashion, conflict, and portraiture, solo presentations of portraits by Irving Penn, among many others. She has written for the groundbreaking Know My Name project that put women artists in Australia on a global stage, as well as for Cindy Sherman, A World History of Women Photographers, and more. But it was her exhibition, Francesca Woodman and Julia Margaret Cameron, Portraits to Dream In, that grabbed my attention. An exhibition that brought together the two photographers working a hundred years apart from very different worlds, circumstances, and contexts, but which showed how these pioneering women shaped the medium with their dreamlike pictures imbued with beauty, symbolism, classicism, transformation, and more. We have discussed Francesca Woodman already in two episodes on the podcast, one with the author Deborah Levy and another with the estate curator Katerina Jerenik. So today, I couldn't be more excited to delve into the life of the 19th century photographer, Julia Margaret Cameron, who, at age 49 in 1863, picked up a camera for the first time, and largely self-taught, crafted her distinctive bohemian style pictures with that hazy sepia glow that proved not only to be influential in Victorian Britain, but have a huge impact on photography at large. As Cameron once said, my aspirations are to ennoble photography and to secure it for the character and uses of high art by combining the real and ideal and sacrificing nothing of truth by all possible devotion to poetry and beauty. Magda Keeney, welcome to the podcast. How are you doing today? Oh my God, Katie, I am such a huge fan girl of the Great Women Artists podcast. So I'm so excited and honored to be here. So thank you for having me and that beautiful introduction. Magda, thank you so much for coming on. I'm a huge fan of yours as well. And of course, Julia Margaret Cameron, who, working in the 1860s, pioneered a photographic style with that sepia glow that made her sitters look bohemian from long hair, headbands, white robes to flowers that chimed with the Pre-Raphaelite painters working at the same time. Whenever I see a photograph by Cameron, I am, I think, spellbound by its pure angelic beauty, but also how contemporary they look. There is something so timeless about her photographs that make me think I might know these girls. So I want to start by asking you, what is it that draws you to Julia Margaret Cameron's work? You know, you've said so much already and all of those things draw me to her work. I think also a sense of her as a path-breaking woman, you know, like an incredible woman artist and the way she approached her practice with such a brave sense of experimentation in her work, the way she, if she made mistakes, she explored that and made it part of her creative process. Totally. I love that idea of experimentation because when you see her pictures for the first time, it is unlike anything you've seen in art history at that point in the 1860s. If you think about photography in the 1860s, that was the daguerreotype process. It was a studio-based process and it was used extensively for portraits and Cameron is a portrait photographer. You know, studio photography in the 1860s probably looks like a carte de visite, a small photograph printed on a piece of cardboard or board that were sort of produced and collected. And so Cameron's prints, her portraits, are studio portraits, but they're entirely different to that model of photographic practice, you know, in scale, in technique, in ambition. Because almost from the outset, even though she acknowledges that when she started photography, she didn't have a great deal of knowledge of the medium, but she had this commitment to art and beauty. We take that for granted now, I think, with, you know, lens-based media and photography, but for Cameron as a woman, she was trailblazing. Totally. I love this quote by her. She says, Your eye can best detect and your imagination conceive all that is to be done and is still left undone. And I love this idea that, you know, when she's making in the 1860s, it's this kind of open road of what this medium is able to do. And you think about, you know, 150 years on, it has completely transformed. And, you know, the 20th century was the kind of time of pioneering photography and she was there before that, lay the foundations almost. Cameron, you know, dies in the 1870s. It's less than 15 years that she's actually working before she dies, but she is working with such intensity and such conviction and working so hard. 20 or 30 years later, at the beginning of the 20th century, you have the advent of, you know, pictorialism, you know, of artists embracing this idea of photography as art and the expressive possibilities of the medium or not primarily the scientific aspects of the medium that were prominent certainly in the early decades of photography and that Cameron was so instrumental in forging a path. Totally. Is there one work by her that stands out to you and what is it and why? When I made the show in London, people would ask, you know, which is your favourite work in the show? And I would always reflect to myself that choosing a single work was kind of like choosing, you know, a single word or a line in a poem or a song. How can you like take one, you know, from the whole? But having said that, there are things that I think have been particularly interesting to me at different times. Certainly the portraits of her niece and favourite sitter, Julia Jackson, who was the mother of Virginia Woolf and Vanessa Bell, are incredible. And she's a sitter that doesn't assume another identity or a persona or a character within her work. She's represented as herself and they're incredibly beautiful. So I love those. There was also a work in the show actually, and it's called Sadness, and it's a portrait of the actress Ellen Terry, who, when she was very young, married the painter G.F. Watts and came into the circle of Cameron at that time. And it was a short-lived marriage, but at that time, Cameron made portraits of her. And it's such a beautiful image where Terry's kind of leaning against this patterned wallpaper and she is holding a necklace and it's a very reflective portrait of her. In the print that we showed at the NPG, which came from the Getty, it's an oval format photograph. And in the bottom of this oval, part of the emulsion is peeled back. And so there's this kind of void in it, this absence. And Cameron keeps the print. So there's this perhaps technical error, but it's so poignant and beautiful and meaningful within the composition of the image. Cameron keeps it and she signs it and she titles it Sadness. And this technical inconsistency becomes integral to her picture making. It's just such a gorgeous, beguiling kind of sensitive portrait of an incredible woman, Ellen Terry. This portrait is so extraordinary because it looks so contemporary. I mean, I feel like I could know this girl, but also I think the power of Cameron's photographs is also this ability to show someone's inner psyche so strongly. I mean, Ellen's eyes are looking down, she's clutching onto her necklace, but you feel like there's something going on internally, which I thought was so beautiful that you titled her exhibition Portraits to Dreaming. Not only do we as viewers get to dream in these works, but you feel like the actual sitters in Cameron's work are dreaming as we're looking at them. And that's so rare in painting, first of all, especially in the 1860s. It was a very long process and people always had their eyes open, but photography can suddenly allow for this new thing. It can allow us to unlock different states of people. With Portraits to Dreaming, what story did you want to tell? I think one thing that I'm interested in as a curator is thinking about how we receive our great heroes or heroines in this case. I do remember being at the V&A and at that time, there was a major Julia Margaret Cameron show on at the National Portrait Gallery in London. I didn't work there at that time. There was so much said about her, so much important work had been done. And a question that I had at that time was, is there anything new that I could add? And then I started thinking about Francesca Woodman and Julia Margaret Cameron because I wanted to think about photographic practice. Art history for hundreds of years may have been presented as linear, but we know that it's not linear. So an early thought around that time was thinking about an artist like Francesca Woodman and thinking about if we started with the work of Woodman, what would happen if we took her work and looked back at Cameron, rather than thinking in the usual linear methodology of art history of starting with the early artist and thinking about the literal influence of one artist on another. And so putting them together was about bringing two of the most important photographers in the history of the medium together. And there's this idea in both of the works of these artists, a kind of metaphorical dreamlike narrative quality that is transcending the real, going back to prints by both of these artists' works. When I sat them side by side, there was for me these conversations that spoke to new ways of thinking about both artists' work. That for me as a feminist art historian also took away that kind of reading of either Woodman or Cameron from a biographical point of view. Both women have received substantial attention, but both women also I think have had their careers limited in a sense by reading which is focused on biographical circumstance or even the way they look and present themselves. And so that was another I think important impetus of the show. I think that's really important. I'm looking at the show from a perspective of someone who's in 2024 and I can look at the 70s and 80s of Woodman's photographs from that perspective. But also I think looking at Cameron's photographs from that perspective is so interesting because I always think even if works are made in the 1860s or 70s, we're still looking at them from the position of now. And I think to be able to guide us and see modernity and see what was happening in America and Italy at that time of the 70s, but apply it to Cameron's photographs is so exciting. And also the kind of range of history that both artists cover. They're incredibly surrealist in their aesthetic, but also Woodman was specifically looking back to the surrealism because she worked in the surrealist bookshop. And similarly with the classics, again, these columns, these cariotids that surround us today even. But I'd love to go into Cameron's life as well because she was born Julia Margaret Patil in Calcutta on the 11th of June in 1815, the fourth of seven sisters. And one of her sisters, as you said, was Maria, who was Virginia and Vanessa Bell's grandmother, making Julia Margaret Cameron the sister's great aunt. So tell us about her family, who were they? Tell us about her sisters, her parents. She grew up in a privileged household. Her father was an official in the East India Company, and her mother was descended from French aristocracy. It's very interesting to consider Cameron's life and her biography in the context of empire and the British in India. So while she was born in Calcutta, most of her education actually happened in Europe. So she went to France and she was educated by her grandmother in Paris and Versailles, and then returned to India when she was about 18. And not long after that, she spent some time in South Africa. And that's when she met Herschel, her great mentor and teacher. But she also meets her husband-to-be, Henry Hay Cameron, and they return to India and they get married. And she has been highly educated. She has great privilege. And so she becomes a kind of central figure in India as a kind of hostess, I guess, a society figure at that time. So there is a definite sense of her kind of cultural sophistication and her education that means when she, and her husband, and her children. So she also has six children. They return to England in the 1840s. And her sisters are also living in England. And her sister, Sarah Princep, has set up this salon at Little Holland House. And so it's not surprising that Julia Margaret Cameron kind of gravitates to this salon. And this is this, I suppose, cultural melting pot where she's meeting great artists, the Pre-Raphaelite painters, people like Henry Taylor, Tennyson. So I think it is interesting to consider her in terms of this cultural social position that as a woman, she occupies a space, not as an artist, but as a hostess and a mother. But she is part of this kind of artistic milieu. She is able to inhabit that many women wouldn't be able to. So whilst I think the courage and tenacity that she had to draw on to establish a career as an artist is undeniable. I mean, a woman sustaining a career as a photographer or an artist was extremely challenging no matter what background you came from because the expectation in the 19th century was that you were married and that you were in the domestic sphere and you were probably a mother. So she was breaking conventions. But I think it is also interesting to think that she did have a degree of privilege, that kind of cultural community around her that gave her the possibility of going down that path. Totally. I mean, Sir John Herschel was the person who actually coined the term photography in 1839. And as you say, in 1836, they met. He was an astronomer who was surveying the skies of the southern hemisphere. I mean, tell us about him and that relationship. I think in the early years of photography, so the invention of the daguerreotype in 1839, was the first commercially available sustainable method of making photographs. It is not a photograph like we know it because it's a unique object. It doesn't have a negative, so it's a one off. And it's an image made with a camera and the exposure of light, but then a very different set of chemical developing methods that were utilized to fix. That was a great challenge in photography. How could you fix this image so it didn't fade and disappear? There were all these different sorts of methods being trialled. And Herschel was one of the people who was really, really key in developing key chemical processes in that fixing process. So not only was he a famous astronomer, but he was deeply engaged with photography. And Cameron called him her great teacher and her great mentor. And they stayed in contact throughout her life before she even started taking photographs. Herschel would send her examples of daguerreotypes and color types. Okay. This is so interesting because then in 1863, at the age of 49, she receives her first camera as a gift from her daughter. I mean, how did this gift change her life? And what even was this camera at this time? So before that, the family had come back to England and Cameron's husband and her sons are still working in the kind of colonial service as administrators. Cameron's much-loved husband is traveling from time to time. And on one of these trips, when he is away, Cameron goes to the Isle of Wight, which is where Tennyson lives. And there's another sort of cultural community. And Cameron buys property there. And Tennyson's there, and people like Dickens are there, and Carlisle. And one of those people was Oscar Raylander. And he is a very important 19th century photographer. And Cameron meets him before the gift of the camera. And there is a fantastic work in the V&A, which is a portrait of a sitter, a woman called Kate Dore. And around the edges of these firms that kind of make a frame that sort of like contact prints on the negative. And that is thought to be a collaboration between Raylander and Cameron. And after that, she assembles an album of photographs too. So she's experimenting, dabbling in photography. And then the gift comes and she acknowledges that at first, I know nothing about the art of photography, but she's, as we've said, absolutely committed to art and absolutely committed to beauty and sees this potential somehow. But the camera that she received was quite unwieldy and hard for a woman to use in the kind of 19th century dress, if you think about those kinds of large skirts and so forth, because it's a wooden sliding box camera. It's heavy. It's cumbersome. To make a photograph, to make a portrait, you have to sit it on a wooden tripod, and it's not a quick exposure. You have to make glass plate negatives, which sit in the back of this wooden box. And Cameron had to do that herself. She had to mix the chemicals. She had to coat the plates, which all had to be done in really specific, kind of intricate ways for it to work out. And then she had to load the camera and make the exposure. And then she had to develop it. But I think it's so interesting how she had this incredible life and education. I mean, I just would love to be a fly on the wall at her house in the Isle of Wight, which was called Dimbela, because I mean, you know, even Virginia Woolf talks about this idea that everyone was welcome. Conventionalities had no place in it. Mrs. Cameron would invite a family, met on the steamer to lunch without asking their names, would ask a hatless tourist, met on the cliff to come in and choose himself a hat. And I love this idea that it was this Bohemian center. And also, I think there's something to be said about a woman trying photography, which is this medium, unlike painting, which doesn't have this long patriarchal, let's say, history of how you have to sort of go about doing certain things or how, you know, with painting, the Royal Academy in the 1700s had established the hierarchy and how mythological painting was at the top and portraiture was at the bottom. In a way, photography was this whole new world. And tell us about her first success. So Annie was this photograph that she made in 1864. Who did she begin photographing? She started photographing the people around her. She works with, you know, the people who work in her household. She works with children who are around her. And she talks about, you know, how she's kind of bailed up different sorts of people in her community and tried to make portraits of them. And none of them had kind of been what she wanted. And then she documents herself, you know, some time afterwards, that she made these portraits of Annie, Annie Philpott, this girl who must be about nine years old. And it's this beautiful head and shoulders portrait. And there is within it, I think, many of the characteristics that she would continue to develop. So it's a female sitter. It's a close-up, a photograph that kind of focuses on Annie's face. There's this kind of play between light and dark in the image. And there is already this kind of soft focus effect. And she recognizes it when she prints it, that something that she was aiming for has been captured in this print. And she's thrilled. She goes to kind of pains to record that it is her success and that this is a starting point of some kind. She kind of goes further and even details the process. And I did this and I did that. And it's almost like she was putting her flag in the ground and saying, you know, I am an artist. And then she goes on to make these gorgeous pictures such as Madonna with Children or Goodness. I mean, do you think there's anything about maybe a mother's or a woman's lens that she sort of brought to these subjects that are so entrenched in art history? Yes. And all of those things you mentioned come together. So she is a mother and she is a devoted Victorian woman who conforms to the expectations of her and loves that, you know. But she's also deeply Christian. The Christian iconography, the biblical stories, the Madonna and Child also relate to her own beliefs. And then thirdly, you mentioned the history of art and that there too, because she does talk about, you know, different paintings that she's referencing, Raphael's Madonna or an Annunciation or, you know, specific points of reference that you can see in her construction of narrative and poses or props that she uses to try and evoke a particular historical representation, say, of a Madonna or a Madonna and Child or the Annunciation. So all of those things come together. As a woman, I mean, I've said that in some senses she conforms to, you know, the expectations of Victorian woman, but nothing's that simple. And that's, I think, again, part of the really interesting thing about Cameron for me is this complexity, because yes, you have that on the one hand, but then on the other hand, her photographs are so subversive in their representation of femininity. That's an idea that many important art historians and women art historians have developed over decades. But for me, what it is, is if you think that the value of a woman in the Victorian times is in many ways centered around her beauty. So if you think about the Pre-Raphaelite models and uses, their value as such is about their great beauty. Cameron's women sitters have great beauty too, but they inhabit a space which allows them to have a complexity of character or a layering of character. So they're not just beautiful women. They could also be goddesses or heroines or mythological figures or Arthurian princesses. So she opens up in her representations, I think, a kind of multiplicity of femininity and capacity of being a woman that sort of blows out this idea of just having to be this beautiful thing to be viewed. They're seeing incredible portrait of Alice Little as Pomona, a goddess of nature. And she's standing so strong within this kind of composition of flowers and foliage that are kind of covering her over. And that are entwining with her hair. And yet she's not submissive to it. She doesn't get lost in it. She's so powerful in the frame and she's returning our gaze. And she's sort of got her hand on her hip. And so she is, yes, incredibly beautiful, but she's incredibly strong. And she is both, you know, Victorian woman and observed, but also kind of goddess figure in nature. And I love this kind of complexity of representation that her narratives and her compositions allow. I think that is so beautiful because if you think about what was happening in the Victorian times at that point, you know, women were completely objectified by the Pre-Raphaelites. But a little bit like Joanna Boyce Wells, who is a contemporary of Cameron, who's a painter. She gives that depth to women. You feel like there is sort of flesh and blood underneath that character. They're not just Lilith seducing the viewer or in a sort of Dante Gabriel Rossetti way. I love this idea that they're strong. And yes, even Alice Little, who you say is Pomona, and Alice Little, I should add, was the inspiration for Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland. So already this kind of incredible muse, but she really owns that photograph. It's an incredible gaze. I mean, in 1865, Cameron begins using a larger camera, which is held at a sort of 15 by 12 inch glass negative. How did her work shift after 1865? She'd obviously just been using this other camera for a year. What did that allow her to do? So again, the technical and the aesthetic coming together in the history of photography, which is always comparing that drives things on in these moments of radical shift, often resulting from that. So she starts using a camera that holds larger glass plates, as you say. She's also got some momentum behind her in that year. She's really pursuing her career as an artist. She's engaged a dealer in London that's selling her prints. She's registered her photographs for copyright. She's approached Henry Cole, the director of the V&A. He's offered her a room that she uses as a studio. They buy some of her works and she gets a larger camera that holds bigger plates. And so her prints are bigger because her prints conform to the size of her negatives. So she's able to work in this larger format. And she has realized that one of the things that she is really interested in in photography is the idea of focus. She starts making these big head studies and they're these kinds of heads, both men and women, so two different projects in her work. But one of the key things she's doing is experimenting with focus. And this idea, I think, of chiaroscuro, the kind of play between light and dark, of depth and roundness. So she's described in her letters, her interest in roundness and this fullness of feature and form that she feels that she can achieve in these larger head studies with this technique of, as she says, stopping short of definite focus. She then begins to make these new, ambitious, beautiful portraits of both men and women. And the women are often, as we've started to talk about, cast as characters. So there are some exceptions to that. And one of them is Julia Jackson, as I've mentioned, her great niece and favourite sitter. But she's casting them as Madonna, setting up these elaborate tableaus of Arthurian legends. She's looking at Daphne and Apollo. She's looking at the Cumaean civil. She's looking at all these different myths and legends. And she turns to literature and to poetry. And she is creating these sort of characters. She uses children and often dresses them up as kinds of angelic and otherworldly figures and cupids. And again, this is, you know, also many of her young women are angels and so forth. And then with the men, she begins this kind of, I guess, lionising project, these great heads, these Victorian figures that she kind of identifies, this pantheon of great Victorian men. And that's the kind of project that was popular at that time, you know, this representation of the great men of the time, the idea of a portrait gallery, in a sense. In some ways too, she's clever because she wants to sell a print. So I think there's both a sort of ideological interest, but also a kind of a knowledge or a recognition that, you know, she can, you know, get Tennyson, the poet laureate to sign the print and she'll be able to sell it and have commercial success because she sought that from her practice as well. Yeah, that's really interesting. I mean, you know, she photographs people like Thomas Carlyle in 1867, who famously penned the great man theory in Victorian England. It's a complex one when you're dealing with her now, that you do have to kind of adhere to these Victorian values. I find it complicated, but I also understand that it was also a sort of shrewd businesswoman move to sort of associate yourself with these people. I kind of feel like they're not mutually exclusive, I agree, but I feel like it was probably quite natural in a sense. I wonder if it was as premeditated as that. I mean, it's interesting too, in Portraits to Dream in, because Francesca Woodman is not often thought about as a photographer who took images of men. She's mostly thought of as a photographer whose project was sort of based around self-portraiture or photographs of women and her friends, but she did often photograph men. One of the things I think with Cameron's Men is when I looked at Woodman's very directorial, ambiguous, surreal narratives that she explores in some of her photographs of men. It allows you to look at Cameron's Men in that same space, also as kind of having this strangeness. And one work by Cameron that is also, I have to say, one of my favorites, is her portrait of Herschel called The Astronomer. Now, she took a number of portraits of Herschel at different times, and he is in this kind of style of the great head floating in space. Though this portrait called The Astronomer, it's sort of got a little bit more distance in it. It's as though he's looking up to the cosmos, to the stars, and he seems to be in like a trance. It's absolutely otherworldly. It's absolutely dreamlike. And this is one of her great men. This is a great scientist. So I also think that in that project, there's capacity to see this kind of dream space and that it wasn't clear cut as one thing or another. Totally. I love this idea that her aim was to record the greatness of the inner as well as the features of the outer man. And actually, it's very bold to take on the subject of man at that time. And maybe we take that for granted for a way in portraiture too. We think a good portrait probably has some sense of interiority, reveals something of the interior of the city, even if that's just at a particular moment in time. But that's quite a modernist idea that I think this idea of psychological revelation through portraiture. But in the 1860s or 70s, photography is kind of, as we've already talked about, the emphasis of photography was on the outer, the real, what you looked like. So this was trailblazing for her to say, well, I'm not just interested in a mirror. I'm interested in capturing something of the inside. It's really interesting. I mean, as you said at the beginning, she had such a short-lived career. And I love this idea. She said, the gift, the camera, from those I loved so tenderly, added more and more impulse to my deeply seated love of the beautiful. And from the first moment, I handled my lens with a tender ardor. And it has now become to me as a living thing with voice and memory and creative vigor. Many and many a week in the year 64, I worked fruitlessly, but not hopelessly. And I love this idea that there is so much of love bound up with the camera as well, whether it was her love for photography in the instance, the love from her daughter, giving her the present, and then that love of creating these pictures of people that they're so tender in a way, her portraits. Yeah, it's really interesting that you bring that forward. In the context of our conversation, I start to think about her as a Victorian woman and the language she uses. And I wonder, would a male artist talk in those terms about his machine, his camera? It's an authentic expression. It doesn't feel glib. It doesn't feel put on by camera. So that's something interesting to think about. I mean, one of my all-time favorite books is All About Love by Bell Hooks and the way that she legitimizes love as a subject and a lens from which we can make things. Bell Hooks talks about this idea that why don't we study love at university, even though it's one of the most important things in the world. And I feel like for me, just from maybe my 2024 perspective, it's legitimate. And I feel it as well with her work. You know, when you go to the V&A and you see those prints, you look at the tenderness with which she photographed and the intimacy. And in a way, because of that, they do become timeless. I mean, in a way, you know, a fantastic show would be with someone like Alice Neal, who also, you know, painted portraits from such a kind of tender perspective. But I was just thinking maybe as a woman artist at that time or as a woman, she could own that. And I think you're right. I mean, because again, returning to the portraits of Julia Jackson, she speaks about her great love of this sitter and they are incredibly intimate and those photographs are remarkable. Or, you know, she photographs her family, she photographs her husband, whom she adored. I think that is definitely in the work. It's also, as you say, timeless, you know, and speaks to us now. Magda, what has Julia Margaret Cameron's photographs or her as a person, what does she mean to you? There are so many different layers of gifts that thinking about her work has given me. My research often begins with the archive and the object. So the great privilege that I feel to have been able to see and spend time with her physical prints is hard to describe what it has given me, but it's given me all of the work that I've been able to do. Amazing. Magda Keeney, thank you so much for coming on the podcast. We do have one more question, as does the great woman artist podcast. If you could ever meet Julia Margaret Cameron, what would you say to her? I'd be so overwhelmed, but not in a fawning way. I would really want to acknowledge her work and thank her because it was hard won. You know, her images are beautiful, but she had to work so hard to be able to make them. She used techniques that weren't conventional techniques and she was at once kind of, yes, she achieved success in her lifetime. You know, yes, she had exhibitions of her work and her work sold, but she was also ridiculed and criticized as a woman and she was criticized for her experimental approach. And I think I just want to ask her if I could ask her something, you know, how did you find it within yourself to keep your practice going amid so many different challenges? I think that's where I'd start. Amazing. Magda Keeney, thank you so much for coming on the podcast today. Thank you so much for having me, Katie. I've loved it. Thank you all so much for listening to this episode of the great woman artist podcast with the fantastic Magda Keeney on Julia Margaret Cameron. Julia Margaret Cameron really was one of the most incredible pioneers of photography. And I urge you all to look up her work, the beauty and the kind of haziness with which she captures her sitters has this magical element that I just find so unique and actually is almost like a thread running through so many photographers' works even now. I mean, I think about someone like Sally Mann, who we interviewed with the podcast a few episodes ago. Go check that out. But also Francesca Woodman, as Magda Keeney talks about, who we've also discussed on the podcast with Katerina Jerenik, with Deborah Levy as well. Thank you all so much for listening to this episode of the great woman artist podcast. It will sound edited by the brilliant Nada Spineledge, and I hope you have a wonderful day.