We're smoking them out, they're running, and now we're going to bring them to justice. Aftershock, the war on terror, is a new podcast from the London Review of Books. We did a whole lot of things that were right. Not only will we be judged by history, we tortured some folks, but we will be judged by God. Listen wherever you get your podcasts. Hello, you're listening to On Politics on the LRB podcast. I am James Butler, a contributing editor at the London Review of Books. At the end of the 20th century and across the first decade of the 21st, a swathe of countries across Latin America elected left-wing governments in what became known internationally as the Pink Tide, often a cause of hope for left-wingers far beyond the Global South. These governments avowed their connections to movements of the poor, spoke against neoliberalism and in the name of the people, and their prominent leaders had often been involved in struggle and frequently armed struggle against dictatorial regimes. Many of these governments sought to harness the commodity boom of the period for their own ends towards a developmentalist and redistributive politics, and at the peak of the tide, three-fifths of the region's population lived under elected left-wing governments. Since then, the story has become somewhat darker, with the faltering collapse or coup of progressive governments across the region. A more recent second wave of what some people see as movements connected to the Pink Tide seems to have culminated in revanchist governments of a new, sharper-toothed and more extreme right, the right of Nayib Bukele, Javier Millay or Jair Bolsonaro. These new extreme rights, plural, are the subject of Tony Wood's review essay in the 6th of November issue of the LRB. Have these waves of the Pink Tide broken on the rock of the libertarian right? Where did these figures come from? And do they all go a grim future, plural of us. Tony Wood joins me from Colorado, where he teaches modern political history, especially that of Latin America. And with me in the studio is Camila Vergara, a critical legal theorist at the University of Essex and a deep thinker on the relationship between oligarchy, democracy and law, issues which bedevil all of our states, but especially acute in Chile, where Camila is from. But let's start by expanding that sketch. So what gets called the Pink Tide is only recognised retrospectively by the mid-noughties. People start to see these elections as connected phenomena. But it starts in 1998 with the victory of Hugo Chavez in Venezuela. Tony, can you give us a clearer picture of where those governments come from? And in particular, I've said that there are what some people view as two waves of the Pink Tide, so another wave that follows. Are there features that unites them? And perhaps more acutely, what differentiates them? Yeah, thank you, James, for that question. I think one of the things we have to think about is the Pink Tide as a very provisional unity in the first place. I think certainly the thing that unites the very first wave of the Pink Tide is its opposition to neoliberalism in the first place as the kind of grounding premise for the politics that they assemble. I guess the second feature is that they're very much a successor to previous generations of the Latin American left, which were often repressed and destroyed by dictatorial regimes. And these are successor formations, in some cases emerging out of social movements, as you mentioned, in some cases emerging out of new parties that formed towards the end of the dictatorships. The paradigmatic example there would be the PT in Brazil. So they are both of the left and distinct from its previous traditions, which nonetheless get absorbed into it when the Pink Tide gathers momentum. So it's a particular new iteration of the left, I would say, and unity as a phenomenon is given by what it stands in opposition to. And self-consciously, obviously, these governments, once in power, aligned with each other as part of a common front against neoliberalism, and that level of unity is important globally and diplomatically. But at the same time, I think once you start to look at the particularities of each national context, the similarities, in many cases, start to subside. I'm thinking particular of Argentina, where through not exactly contingent, but through a strange quirk of circumstance, the opposition to neoliberalism was led by the Peronist Party, which had implemented the neoliberal agenda in the first place in the 1980s. And so it's the kind of left wing of Peronism that incarnates the Pink Tide in Argentina, but it's actually totally distinct from all of these other left traditions that I've been talking about. The PT is distinct, again, in having a large organized party as its core. The PT formed in the 1980s, everywhere else it was much more heterogeneous coalitions of social movements with new electoral formations that rose out of the ruins of the neoliberal party system. I mean, thinking in particular of Bolivia, Ecuador, and Venezuela, the paradigmatic case, if you like, of that example where the kind of pacted party system of the Punto Fijo Pact collapses under the strains of implementing a neoliberal agenda, and it's the new Chavez formation that profits. So in that sense, we think of the Pink Tide, I think it's important to think of it as a kind of plural shifting set of fronts rather than a coherent political movement. The second Pink Tide, in a way, the same applies, but even more so. The unity there is, I think, at a secondary level in terms of being a recursion, repetition of what came before, but in a minor key, much more fragile, popular support, much thinner electoral mandates. The other thing I would throw in there is also that one of the primary representatives of Pink Tide 2.0 was L칩pez Abrador in Mexico. I think there's an argument for considering the Mexican iteration of this on a separate of temporality as a kind of resurgence of a national populist tradition in New Garb drawing from the left wing of the PRI party in Mexico, plus a longer kind of left populist anti-imperialist tradition that is related to the Pink Tide, but also somewhat distinct. So I've sort of have probably not answered a question, but in a sense, complicated the premises in a possibly unhelpful way. But I do think that those things do play into why and how these governments eventually run out of steam and are in a much weaker position even once elected in this more recent period. I would say I would add, I think that I agree with Tony, and I would add that the first Pink Tide was also characterized by the enfranchisement of large parts of the population that had been left behind outside of the political game. I'm talking about indigenous peoples, the peasant communities, rural areas. And also this is connected to the output, basically the biggest of all in terms of law, which are the new constitutions. And the three constitutions of Venezuela, Ecuador, and Bolivia enfranchised or enfranchised the campesino and indigenous peoples, but also gave rights to indigenous peoples, recognized the black minorities. So in a way, it kind of prefigured the plurinational push in the constitution. So it emerged, especially in Bolivia, as a kind of a rainbow coalition. And then it enshrined this rights in constitutional form. I think that is the basic difference or most important difference, at least from the law perspective, from the so-called second wave. I do not agree that this is a second wave of the Pink Tide, but more a kind of iteration of the more social democratic tendencies of the left-wing parties. As Toni said, the first wave was basically ad hoc parties that were created either around the leader or as a coalition of trade unions and indigenous peoples as in Bolivia. And they were very attached to the president, to the leader. So in a way, populism in Latin America is really connected to the charismatic leader, which is inherently problematic in the sense that if a government is there for enfranchisement of the population, then it is not only about giving them welfare or better conditions, but also political rights and political agency. And that proved difficult, even if those rights were in the constitution. The other prong of this question or picture of these governments is the sort of structural economic one. So one of the takes on the sort of first wave of the Pink Tide or the original Pink Tide is that this is fundamentally connected to the commodity boom. It arises in a moment of economic crisis, but it's sustained by, in many ways, a sort of rapidly industrializing East Asian nations that have a strong hunger for oil. They also have a strong hunger for grain, so soya, maize, that kind of production is very, very important. And once that commodity boom dies down, those governments start to lose legitimacy. And so I wonder, Toni, what's your take on that? Does it make sense to think of these governments as, I mean, it never makes sense to think of governments as purely expressions of economic needs or structures, but that economic picture seems to undergird a lot of the things that they are able to do in power. Yeah. I mean, I think, again, without wanting to be too reductive in one's analysis, I do think that that just does apply, partly because, and as a result of the neoliberal kind of transformation of these economies and emphasis on export-led growth, the commodity boom is a crucial structuring factor in exactly what it is any government, actually, in these countries could do. And I think that in terms of the chronological framing, I think as a crucial enabling condition for the pink tide, it is important to bear in mind that commodities boom, because it is the thing that enables them to implement their agenda redistribution. And as Camillo very rightly said, this sort of constitutional refoundation, in some cases, additional rights at, let's say, an acceptable political cost and low economic cost to elites. And I think it's because you're in a positive, some economic growth situation that all of these things can go together. In addition to an expansion of consumption, I think that's another important aspect is the absorption of large layers of the population or increasingly large numbers of them into a consumer economy, the provision of sort of very cheap credit, consumer goods, much more widespread. That aspect of the pink tide success is not to be neglected. Once you remove that enabling condition of commodity growth, I think then the political calculus for everybody shifts, including how much the regions, the governments are able to do. And this is certainly the case of, you know, austerity was begun in Brazil by Dilma Rousseff, not the successor government, not the right wing, out of necessity. And I think at that point, it does become a different kind of battle for the elites of more of a zero-sum game that we are distributing diminishing fruits. And at that point, I think that does help at least partially explain this switch to a much harder, you know, as you put it, sharper-toothed right, that they're going to have to claw back the gains that were previously made and to secure their share of a diminishing portion of economic growth. So I think it is a helpful framing premise within which we then have to explain all of the other contingent factors that are worth considering. Yeah, I think the commodity boom not only allow for the, basically, welfare of the population and the decrease of poverty and extreme poverty, and as you well say, we need to recognize that, but also allow for their survival, I think, politically speaking. I think the trauma of the 1973 coup against Allende, who came, who was one of the first to come through the ballot box and kind of stay and have some kind of stability, really resonated with these new elites, and they didn't want to antagonize the local oligarchy by increasing taxes or expropriating large holdings. I think the commodity boom allowed for them not to basically antagonize the elites and survive politically. However, this caused a problem with organized communities, especially indigenous peoples, especially in Ecuador, the first constitution to enshrine the rights of nature, and the first country that did that and violated these rights, right, by allowing the drilling of oil in the Amazon in protected zones. There is a constant struggle from the communities against the state because these governments were extractivists in nature, so they didn't switch or they didn't modify the matrix of economic power away from this extractivist economy towards a more sustainable community-based economy as the indigenous peoples and peasant communities wanted. So I think that was a very big limit for the Latin American populists, not moving away from this extractivism and the contradictions that that created until today. Let's talk about the reactionaries who are at the center of Tony's piece. And these are, as one of the authors under review calls them, rights, plural. There are obvious distinctions in some ways between them. And yet, in some ways, one of the points that you make, Tony, is that, certainly economically, these new strongmen are far more homogeneous than the old Latin American right, among whom you have the occasional fascist and integralist, a haughty disdain for mercantilism of one kind or another. That all seems to have evaporated. That's now completely given way to the sort of the ultra-libertarianism of someone like Millet or Bukele, both of whom have these sort of crypto-obsessions, among other things. Bolsonaro doesn't seem that far away from them either. They trade very strongly on anger and victimization. That's particularly true in the Argentinian case, I think, where a general sense of injury on the part of many voters seems to transfer to Millet in particular. And they also seem to invade against what they describe as a sort of left-wing, bureaucratic caste who are prone to corruption and self-enrichment. What other features do these people possess, and what distinguishes them from each other? Yeah, that's a good question. I mean, you've singled out a lot of really important aspects of these figures. And just as a kind of crucial thing to think about that enables all of these figures, is this is unusual globally, and I mentioned this in the piece, that this is a place where the left has the massive disadvantage of incumbency, of being the incumbent presiding over a period of retrenchment and austerity after a period of sustained growth and expanded expectations and popular participation. So I think they are sort of, in terms of their emotional register, as you mentioned, James, they really capture something important and channel it very effectively. I think there's also a sort of rhetorical style component, which they share with many other global strongmen, and also the use of kind of, I mean, this was discussed in a previous episode of your podcast, James, the fact that what we would call mainstream media is actually not the mainstream anymore. The mainstream is this parallel infrastructure of TikToks, podcasts, et cetera. And I think the extent to which the right has really been able to hegemonize that parallel set of discourses is super important in the sense that it gives them a much more, a base among young voters in particular that I think few people suspected they would acquire based on policy alone. I think the one other thing to think about here is, and I haven't sort of fully thought this through, but you know, if we think of The Pink Tide as a kind of a success built on the disintegration of the neoliberal paradigm, both politically, ideologically, economically, I think these right-wing fingers are also symptoms of that same collapse, if you like. And so they betray a lot of those same features and they're not exactly a mirror image of the left. But I think to the extent that they do capture a kind of anti-systemic discourse, they often resort to extra parliamentary methods. They have this parallel media. They are a kind of twisted, updated mirror image of The Pink Tide in some limited senses. The paradox, if you like, is that they are this sort of anti-systemic force that is re-imposing the system that they're decrying, in fact, doubling down on it massively. And that, in a way, that might be a window for hope in the sense that that will quickly get found out. Electors are not sort of stupid. They recognize this when they see it. And that's why the recent elections in Argentina were so interesting. On one level, massive success for Millet, the kind of bludgeoning threat of Trump pulling away economic support if he didn't win seems to have worked, et cetera, et cetera. But participation was extremely low in a place that has compulsory voting. So the question is when and how the left or any other alternative coalition is able to capture that vote that is already disappointed in this right-wing re-imposition of the same agenda. So one feature of this right that we will have to see is whether it has a shorter lifespan than even the second iteration of The Pink Tide, like whether we're dealing with diminishing cycles of political success. Yeah, I think the reactionary turn, it's really, as you say, kind of responds to this as the populist way responded to the disintegration of neoliberalism. The reactionary turn is the disintegration or the failed revolution of The Pink Tide, I would say, that they were not able to deliver in terms of changing really the matrix of power, not only economically, but also politically. Remember that Hugo Chavez campaigned for a more participatory government, the creation of the Bolivarian circles, trying to copy the Zapatistas. So there is a desire, I would say, from the ground up to really change the system of representative democracy, which is very centralized. So all of these governments have operated within this system and have been unable or unwilling, even have no proposals, actually, to really change the system. In terms of where this reactionary force comes from, I would say it's not only a reaction to this failed revolution, but also a strategy, very specific, that comes from the United States, actually. If we see the reactionaries as part of a global coalition or a loose coalition of Christian nationalists that basically begins with the Koch brothers and the creation of the Tea Party movement in the United States and then basically spreads like wildfire with a lot of funding coming from the evangelicals in Latin America, I know, at least in Chile, but also in Brazil, how the evangelical churches started buying radios that were previously owned by universities or local organizations, and basically start propagating this kind of new hegemony that goes back to a very reactionary ideology of the family that is against this idea of gender ideology, that is anti-democratic, that wants to exit the human rights packs all around the world. So the international law is being under questioned by these groups. So I think in addition to the normalization of violence, of course, Bolsonaro comes after 2016. So we have this kind of upward mobility of these groups that were in the margins and have always been from the kind of dictatorship era that become normalized. And I think in addition to the U.S. is the Vox Party in Spain, which has a lot of influence in these groups in Latin America. I think there's a fixation with anti-immigration policies, which are not as pronounced as in Europe or the United States, but still that anti-immigration is connected to crime and crime, of course, to poverty. So is the idea of criminalizing poverty and the connection between drug dealers and immigration. So there's a lot of loose connections being done there that resonate with people that are insecure. I would say also what Tony was saying about state corruption, the state bureaucracy, not only from the left and from the right, but it has been weaponized by the right. And this is very true. The state bureaucracy is bloated. There's a lot of clientelism everywhere. And again, it's this idea that common people cannot participate in government, cannot decide, have any say. And here the example, for example, of Bolivia and the water war in Cochabamba, for example. Cochabamba was a place in which water was not efficiently delivered to the community and the community was asking for self-management of the resources. What the mass government gave them was a couple of seats in the corrupt public committee that basically organized the water system. So in a way, nothing changed. And today, after lots of years after the water war, half of Cochabamba does not have drinkable water. So in a way, the state corruption is really true and there was no way to kind of fix that. So of course, the right capitalized on this. I think part of the issue here is that this Christian nationalism is connected to austerity measures. And here I want to highlight Clara Matei's book on the capital order that basically sees austerity as enabling the fascist regime. So we are in a conjuncture today in which the discourses of nation, family, and religion are together the same as in the 20s and 30s in Europe and coupled with austerity measures. Given the context and kind of that forces this upon the new governments and even the so-called second wave of the pink tide governments, they are basically managing the system instead of challenging it. So it is very likely that the far right will win against this kind of more conservative or measured kind of left that is not bold enough to challenge the basis of the system. I want to ask a question about the electoral blocks here. I mean, on the one hand, you know, the way that we were talking about Argentina in particular sounds like the classic Gramscian account of how Caesarism emerges, right? So you have these two contending blocks, each of which are capable of vitiating the other's programme, but neither is capable of enacting fully the promises that it makes. And this sort of attritional conflict between them gives rise to a situation in which a third party can come through and articulate a discourse of renewal in often rather sinister and violent terms. That seems to me to be one possibility. I think it's quite plausible to see a future in which you get many of those movements arising again in Latin America. On the other hand, one of the themes that's emerged in both of your descriptions of the original pink tide governments is a situation in which a left-wing government is elected and perhaps because of the sort of monetary presence of the Allende example doesn't confront sort of landed interests, elites, Latifundia, whatever, and says, OK, we're going to let you have what you have, we're not going to fundamentally alter this structure as long as you allow us to do this kind of stuff. And that seems to have procured, for some period at least, elite consent to their project. That consent seems to have evaporated, but who else is in that block? Who else is voting? On a very simple level, who's voting for these people? Yeah, that's a great point. One area to think about is how much the traditional right voters are defecting to these new formations that are the third option in the kind of Caesarist scenario you were laying out, James. And that seems to have happened a bit in Argentina in these midterm elections, right? That a lot of the traditional right voters went to Millet's party. There are also, I mean, and this is part of the right-wing populist phenomenon elsewhere in the world, there's a lot of new voters or previously disaffected voters rejoining the political process. I would have to look at the data, but I imagine that's a large chunk of it, especially the youth vote tilting, disaffected youth voters tilting to Millet in Argentina is one very major example. And I think the other sort of piece of the picture that relates to your previous points coming in as well, I wanted to add something there, was that these are economies in which informal labor is a very large chunk of the economy. And I think that has very profound sociological, political, ideological consequences in many different ways, but one of which is the kind of the difficulty people have in finding kind of sense-making collectivities, if you like, the trade union movement has always been a very small portion of the workforce across most of Latin America. Informal labor doesn't give you that sort of set of ready-made connections, ways of interpreting the world, types of political literacy, if you like. To the extent that neoliberalism has increased that degree of informality, it creates this much more fragmented kind of subjectivity that is much more available to swings in whichever political direction. Which brings me back to your original question, James, and this I don't know the answer to in terms of data, but it is possible a large block of former pink tide voters are just defecting to the new option, right? These are swing voters in the largest possible sense. There's some evidence this was the case for Bolsonaro, like a lot of voters in the favelas who previously voted BT just swung to Bolsonaro, which seems in a certain sense implausible politically, but I think that is what is happening. And so the question is how to make sense of those people's choices. And I do think this sense of sort of being unanchored sociologically, of drift and of generalized crisis, I think COVID played a very big role in shaping especially young voters' experiences. So I think that's got to be a part of the picture. And then there may be people, for example, right wingers who did not participate in the process during the pink tide governments because of the electoral success of the left, right? That they actually were just discouraged from participating. And now that the wind is back in the sails of the right, they feel like, oh, this is an electoral process that is either going to get me the result I want, or if it doesn't, we can turn out on the street and beat people up into submission. So I think there's a lot of different types of voter and a lot of different types of behavior we need to explain to understand it. Yeah, I think, you know, there's a dual response to the crisis that we have been talking about. And I think it is global here, I am including Europe and the United States. In terms of, you know, the crisis comes with the politicization of inequality, both political and economic, and the inability of the current, you know, establishment parties and governments to do something about it. We're just seeing a kind of a slow deterioration of our conditions. And that has prompted a lot of disaffection within the system. So turnout is very, very low, generally. And there has been two responses. One is the populist response that is based on class. So an appeal to the common people as the plebs in a way. And the other is the appeal to the nation, which basically sociologically could be the same people, but there is a different activation, if you will, or a different appeal to a different part that it has to do with other form of security, in the sense that not security that is material, that everybody is going to have, you know, a basic welfare, but actually that there's others that come and get, is going to kind of undermine your welfare. Their invasions, right, of other people. And they're coming through the borders. And this is, of course, a propaganda that is, you know, spread through the media. So in some places is more accurate and other places has nothing to do with the actual reality. For example, in Chile, Chile is one of the safest countries in Latin America, however, the majority of news is about crime. And there's not a lot of it, but it's all around the news. So this has prompted the more precarious populations that are afraid of the crime and the narcotraffic, the drug trafficking in their communities that is blamed on the other. So this kind of like primordial fear allows for that kind of population who were voting for the left-wing parties to switch to charismatic leaders from the right, who are promising the mano dura, the tough hand, right? So in a way, they are going to deliver because these other guys from the center that have been managing the government and the economy and the crime persecution have been basically unable to do anything to revert this kind of going down the slope. I think the idea of systemic corruption, that the system doesn't work, that the system is really rotten from within, that is rigged. This has prompted this precarious populations to basically vote, if they're going to vote, they're going to vote for someone that actually is promising drastic measures, either from the left or from the right. So there is really this kind of no left, no right, but anti-party or anti-traditional party. And this is very, very prominent in Chile. And still today, the party affiliation and of course union affiliation and other affiliations that are attached to politics are at an all-time low. Thanks for listening to On Politics on the LRB podcast, and we'll be back just after a short break. Secret Maps is a new major exhibition at the British Library. Secret Maps traces the levels of power, coercion and secrecy that lie behind maps from the 14th century to the present day. Open now, the exhibition explores how maps have been used to reveal and conceal knowledge about the world around us. Vote tickets now at bl.uk forward slash secret maps. You're listening to On Politics on the LRB podcast, and I'm talking with Tony Wood and Camila Vergara about the rise and the fall of the pink tide governments and the extremely sharp-toothed far-right governments that are replacing them. This question of the strong hand seems to be very, very prominent among, particularly relating to Bukele, who seems to inspire reactionaries the world over, including in Britain, where people are calling for a Bukele-style approach to crime here. I think proportionally he has the largest percentage of the population locked up worldwide. And that's a kind of state violence, of course, that's inarguable. And I suppose that there are two prongs to this question. One is about that configuration, the use of the state to punish, persecute, you know, in force in one way or another. There was, of course, a police slaughter in the favelas just the other weekend, a jaw-droppingly bloody raid there. And yet there also seems to be a wider question of violence here. And violence has attended Latin American politics for a long time. It's hard not to see the new writers more enamored of violence than their predecessors, at least rhetorically. And that has an effect, among other things, of degrading the political system to such a point where participation in it is irrational. So I mean, the case that always comes to mind for me is Colombia, which is not a Pink Tide, original Pink Tide government at all, very much not. But when the guerrillas of the left try to participate in the political process in the 80s, they simply all get slaughtered, right? So they give up their arms to participate in politics and are simply all murdered. This question, of course, is present for Chileans as well, I think, Camila. So I'm going to ask you about this sort of omnipresent threat of violence. Yeah, I think there is, as you say, with the Bukele model of this mega-prisons and dealing with crime through the violation of human rights and pushing this model as necessary and normal and desirable. So on the one hand, we have Bukele as the kind of this model of the strong hand, tough on crime that delivers. And on the other, we have the kind of ghost of Venezuela that is really, really in everybody's minds and in the propaganda as well. Because basically, if you're not like Bukele, you will become like Venezuela. So there's like these two poles. And of course, they're both unacceptable in a manner that there are this very, there's violations of human rights now in Venezuela, not to the extent as in Bukele. There is a kind of degradation of governments from within, I would say, especially in Venezuela, given the sanctions by the US. The more isolated is a country, the more likely these violations of human rights will occur. And these, of course, are connected to the normalization of violence during the dictatorships. So I think one of the issues I want to bring forward is, especially in Chile, the equation between the violence against things during protests, so vandalism and kind of putting things on fire, right, destroying bus stops, equating this violence to the violence against people, against humans. And of course, the first one demonizes the protests and criminalizes protests and saying this is violence, which negates the structural violence that the communities have been suffering for so long. And on the other hand, kind of normalizes the kind of condemnation of this violence, but normalizes the proliferation of violent acts by the state to repress this violence. So agents of the state are using weapons and means to repress violence in the streets, violence again against private property through means that are almost militarily. And we have seen in the United States now with ICE, also with the throwing of tear gas bombs. And we, of course, saw in Chile that during the uprising of 2019, more than 400 people lost their eye, right, their eyes, one or two. And this is, of course, against the regulations of the use of weapons during protests and international law. So all of this is illegal, right? But there has been a normalization in order to impose order. So I think the violence is really connected to the desire of this imposing of order and seeing disorder as something that comes from below and needs to be managed and repressed. It is the discontent coming from the popular sectors that is seen as very dangerous for the elite. So the state is really imposing this violence and normalizing it. In terms of the guerrilla movements and what is the lesson of the giving up arms, of course, as you say, it is suicidal to give arms, to give up weapons when you are in a situation of agreements as happened in Colombia. But also we need to remember that during the transition to democracy in Chile, the people that were in the opposition to Pinochet that came to power after, they basically sold out their comrades and hunted down the guerrilla fighters that were trying to kill Pinochet in the last years. They hunt them, everybody down with the same apparatus of intelligence that Pinochet was using. They used it to put them in jail and basically to get rid of this more radical revolutionary part of the opposition to the dictatorship. So the lessons here are very clear. If you give up your weapons, you will end up dead. If you don't go and want to be in democracy, you'll also end up dead or in jail. So in a way, it is a tight spot. Tony? Yeah, I mean, I think it's looking behind everything Camila has just said, and I just wanted to emphasize it more, is the role of the militaries in Latin American political and public life, which is, you know, these are not like European militaries are for colonial adventures and in positions abroad. These mostly are militaries for policing their own populations. And I think that role, the question of what is the military's role, it really depends on how well the political process is going in terms of keeping the population where it needs to be with regard to the elite and its interests. To the extent that elite interests can be accommodated within a democratic set of rules, the military is absent. To the extent that it can't, the military comes back. So the question on the horizon for all of the Pink Tide, really, given the experiences of the guerrilla movements, as Camila mentioned, and the ferocious repression was, okay, we are going to have to agree to play by the democratic rules of the game because the military is just over the horizon. And a lot of these transitions out of the military detentions involved, they were agreed transitions with the military that preserved their role, crucially, their funding, all of these things. One of the interesting features of Latin American political life of the past 25, 30 years or so is how relatively small a role the military has played politically compared to the previous 200 years. And so in the longer perspective, the question is, how enduring is that institutional shift? And is part of this right-wing shift we're seeing, if it goes out of control, going to involve the military coming back in to play an active political role? The thing that makes me sort of hesitate to predict anything like that with confidence is the degree to which the right has really internalised market imperatives and the military don't always do that because their imperatives are rather different. The thing that allows them to kind of fix that contradiction is this whole problem of security and drug trafficking in the sense that you can delegate that task of suppressing drug trafficking and keeping populations in check to the military and spend money on that and reduce the other functions of the state to a bare minimum. That would be the kind of this round of neoliberalism's dream, a sort of Mano Dura, a securitarian discourse with ample funding for the military, and on the other hand, you massively scale back what the state is doing in terms of its economic role in mitigating or reversing inequalities and intervening in markets. So that would be one thing is the question of how that combination is managed and how violent that becomes, and that's going to be very hard to predict, but I wouldn't totally rule it out. There are two questions which emerged for me from this, but the first, and I think the one that just isn't clear to me, is about the role of the state and the way that the state has been used by Pink Tide governments in particular. There are two clear examples, one who is sort of post Pink Tide, one who is sort of a debatable case, but those are the case of Chavez and then Maduro, and then nearby is the kind of appalling state of Nicaragua. These are both states in which democracy has essentially collapsed and which are held together by a strong man. But there seem to be other cases where democracy is not looking great, but the economy is looking rather better. They're less isolated. So somewhere like Peru, for instance, is in a similar situation with a weak sort of democratic structure, but a more or less functional economy. I suppose Ecuador might also fall into this category. And then there's the states we've been talking about, which have these sort of, either these strong men or these sort of second Pink Tide governments in which both democracy and economy seem to be functioning more or less in one way or another. In Argentina, of course, on life support. I suppose my question is about whether there were misunderstandings about how to run a state in these governments, which of course, as we've been saying in the first wave or the sort of original Pink Tide, were run by parties which were sort of very ad hoc, which were composed around their leaders, which had, in many cases, very little experience of governing at all. Not always the case with someone like Lula, for instance, who had a much more extensive background in politics. But nonetheless, these people seem to have come into government and in one way or another either been captured or simply found themselves defeated in attempting to use the state. So have these experiences revealed something about the nature of the state or the nature of the state, particularly in Latin America? Are there things that should have been obvious earlier on? Tony, I'm going to start with you on that question. I mean, certainly it's true of the lot of Pink Tide governments as they came in, they were formed, as we mentioned, from these very heterogeneous, relatively inexperienced, relatively new political movements. And there is just a problem of cadres in there that you don't have the trained personnel for a lot of these tasks. And that is just going to create difficulties. So I think there is a problem also of these movements that if you immediately institutionalize or absorb interstate structures, all of your political operatives, then you have an immediate drop off in your political movements or you open it to opportunists. So there's a problem of both cadres for the state, but also of renewal for the movement itself. And that relationship has not been healthy. And I think that the key symptom there is the persistence of the same leaders of these Pink Tide governments, even when unsuccessful, again and again and again, that you have to keep re-electing Correa, Morales, Ch치vez until he passed away, Lula, you know, going for a fourth term, that there is a real problem of not just of leadership, but of renewal across the entire structure. And I think in a way what it reveals is that the state is a very big and complicated thing to run and you need an enormous movement if you're going to effectively try and replace everything that's already there. The alternative is to work with what is there and then you run into institutional blockages. And again, Chavismo is quite indicative in this respect that a lot of the most successful social initiatives of the Ch치vez governments did a kind of end run around the state. They were in parallel structures like the Misiones to the different neighborhoods, the medical personnel brought in from Cuba. These are not through, these are not services delivered through the existing state apparatus. They're kind of accretions to it with the problems of corruption that eventually resulted and became more glaring under Maduro. The other thing I would say that, you know, and this is not intended as a criticism of these governments per se, it's more of a hindsight piece of wisdom, but I think what the rise of the right recently has revealed to me at least is the extent to which the pink tide was trying to legislate a lot of social and political changes that there was not sufficient mobilization to push through. And I think there's a sense in which it kind of reversed the sequence through which a lot of things previously in Latin America at least have tended to happen, which is that you have, I mean, I'm thinking of a dramatic example, the Mexican constitution of 1917 was a kind of condensation of massive social struggles on the land and it crystallized it into a form that the political class found acceptable and was the new ground for politics thereafter. And I think the pink tide to some extent in a more, much more minor way, attempted to reverse that process. And so one of the, you know, obviously they're horrible reactionaries in all kinds of ways, but the question I think for the left to ask itself is how is it so easy to reverse a lot of these things, given that we thought we were popular and we were riding the kind of wave of history and it turns out we weren't. So I think the fragility of a lot of these very important gains is a very sobering thing. And I think the left has to think hard about how to re-bolster those gains and how to push through and make them more enduring. What is it that would help institutionalize, enshrine them beyond the constitution itself? Yeah, I think the states in Latin America reveal that authoritarianism is pervasive throughout basically. There is a continuation of sectors of the state that basically functions in the same the military being the most prominent. There's no purge of the military when these governments come about. In Chile, when we transitioned to democracy, there was no purge whatsoever. So if you think about the education in the military academy, that was basically an education that came from the School of the Americas, it kept happening. And the same people that were under the dictatorship active in the military, they're still active today. And the military is basically a semi-autonomous section of the state. And we need to remember that there's no successful revolution that has not allied with the military. If you don't have the military on your side, the probability of a coup is very high. And this is a permanent threat, and it's a real threat. And of course, we know that in Venezuela, the 2002 coup was backed by the US, but basically the local oligarchy with a part of the military, and was very successful in bringing this about. And that prompted a shift, at least in Ch치vez, in Venezuela, that was in a way granted in the sense that if you were imprisoned by a coup, you're not going to be soft on your political enemies. And this is kind of a normal outcome. But the moment that you start imprisoning people for plotting against you, it's very difficult to have justice, right? So in a way, this kind of violations of human rights that have become normal, or the imprisonment of political dissidents, coming from the right that are, again, it is a real threat of plotters that want to overthrow you. This is something that is in the back of the minds of everyone in Latin America. In Chile, it's so stark, this, that the military have their own budget. And actually, Pinochet did this just before leaving, that basically the military has a guaranteed percentage of the copper revenue that goes to their coffers. So this has, because of the copper boom, the military is basically seven times larger than any of the bordering countries, even if Chile's population is very small, right? So in a way, and we need to remember also that all the militaries collaborate among each other. They go into retreats and they go on workshops and they have a knowledge transfer. And it's not only with the U.S., but especially with Israel. So there is kind of this military coalitions that is global in which tactics of repression and ways of dealing with social unrest are shared, not in an official manner, but through the militaries in a more informal way. And this is something that is destabilizing, would destabilize any new government, because it's very difficult that that government will have actually connections with the military. In terms of this new wave of the pink tide and the kind of going into reelection over and over again, I think one thing that we need to notice is that in every iteration of these campaigns, these populist leaders become more and more conservative. But the opposite happens when it's the far right. So the more they get validated, the more extreme they get. So we have, in a way, the foreclosure of the political discussion and the possibility of changing the system when coming from the left, and then from the right is really the negation of democracy and going back to the dictatorship mindset. And one of the questions that I have is when we talk about democracy, democracy for whom? Because when we talk about democracy in Venezuela or Nicaragua, we tend to say, well, there's no really elections or elections are a sham, therefore there's no democracy. Or we're talking about the violation of rights and the imprisonment of people and torture and other things. And if we think about democracy as also this kind of liberal part of it, then you can see that throughout Latin America, there's patches of violations of human rights against specific people. So you can have a generalized rule of law that is acceptable, but then you have really violations of human rights against indigenous peoples, against environmental groups. In Latin America is the most dangerous place for an activist. Many of them are killed every year. So in a way, you see that the state doesn't protect some groups and really it kind of has a formal embrace of the democratic system, but not really for all. So I think this is a pervasive authoritarian and oligarchic streak of politics in Latin America that basically the state is there to maintain. There are many things we've only touched on and it seems to me one of the animating features of this new right is their loathing of the idea that indigenous or mestizo citizens are citizens. And that seems to me to be, that's one of the things that unites them in this sort of reactionary international, you know, this sort of hispanidad link with Vox in Spain. Along with that presumably is also a sort of hatred of so-called gender ideology, along perhaps with a skepticism about climate change. These things seem to unite these actors. One of the other things and one of the things that I think it is worth us mentioning is the role that drugs plays as a sort of justifying pretext for both these actors domestically, but then also the sort of imperial exercise of power on the part of the United States. So as we speak over the last few days, Trump has been really saber-rattling. He's already been sort of murdering people at sea, actually is what he's been doing. But the pretext there being that Venezuela in particular is a source of drug trafficking into the United States. This isn't an issue that only concerns the United States. It's an issue that poisons polities domestically throughout Latin America. These right-wing actors accuse left-wing political parties of being narco-communists. That seems to me to be an improbable reading of the political preferences of drug cartels. But what impact do they have on this picture? And Tony, I'm going to ask you to enlighten us on that. One of the things to think about is that one doesn't really know individually what the cartels want politically, but it's true that they benefit from fragmentation politically. It's much easier to buy smaller, less consolidated parties and also a variety of different actors. That's certainly been the case in Mexico where you have a kind of fragmentation of the political system. I think it also has to do with the particular structure of how policing works in individual countries. The more federal the state, the more dispersed police power and lines of control are. For example, in Mexico, you have many levels of police, municipal, state, federal, which has advanced opportunities for corruption in different ways. I think the other thing is that there's an extent to which the militarization of strategy that a lot of governments have gone for from Mexico, continued under AMLO and under Shane Baum is even more so, but also Noboa in Ecuador is doing very much the same. That doesn't necessarily threaten the cartels so much, or rather it threatens particular actors, but it doesn't threaten them as a structural actor in the landscape commercially, politically, whatever you want to call it, partly because they are so amazingly well-funded and well-equipped. They can always dare the state into escalating this militarily further. This is why a lot of these militarized strategies may play well electorally to a certain constituency that wants the strong hand, but in practical terms, they rarely have a long-lasting successful effect. They're mainly for show and then they have to retrench and make a new deal with whoever's left standing. To my understanding, that's been what's happened in a lot of these recurrent cases. I think the other piece that comes to mind when thinking particularly of Mexico, just because it's the case I know best, that there's a sense in which you could see the rising power of these different drug cartels. On the one hand, obviously, it affects very strong sustained demand for the United States, but on the other hand, it's gone hand in hand with the advance of neoliberalism and the fragmentation of the state role in the economy and at the same time, the fragmentation of political authority. All of these things have played very much into the cartels' hands. I guess the other piece here is the trade preferences of the cartels. A lot of the fentanyl that everyone is talking about is coming in from the Pacific. This is why Venezuela has nothing to do with fentanyl. I don't know how much the cartels will fear a further military escalation. I think in terms of US policy, it's very much not aimed at the cartels, I will say. It's very much aimed at the Venezuelan government in the first place and the Cuban government in the second place, possibly the Nicaraguan one in between if they feel like it. So this is very much a kind of utilization of drugs as an opportunity to advance a particular kind of aggressive gunboat policy. I guess the other piece here is that the case of Venezuela is showing that they can literally say anything. It really doesn't matter if it has any factual basis at all and it really doesn't matter if it's illegal under international law. They will just do anything and the kind of post-facto justification will do. The only hope I see in this scenario is that the Trump administration is both very stupid and very lazy and they may not be able to sustain the attention required to do lasting damage to these state formations. But I think the cartels will be able to work out a way to survive and keep doing as long as demand in the US is strong. That's the ultimate kind of magnet for this stuff. I think that analysis is completely correct and I would add, further complexify this by highlighting the connection, historical connection between the military and drug traffickers because in a way you're going to bring the military to deal with the narco, but basically they are the narco in many places, starting with Pinochet. Pinochet was supposedly very pure according to his right-wing followers, but then after he died and all the kind of accounts in the Riggs Bank that actually also has been, was funding Jeffrey Epstein and all this kind of very shady operations, a lot of money has been found connected to the drug cartels. After his death, the military started having more small enterprises, if you will, and now it is really going back into a more kind of systematic coalition with the drug cartels. A lot of operations have been going down in Chile, capturing military and police officers that have been involved in the traffic. We know that the military and the police are all connected to, at least not all of the military and the police, but a very important part, connected to the drug traffickers. In Mexico it's even worse because there is reports of drug cartels clearing the way for very unpopular local developments. When you have indigenous populations that are against the drilling of oil or the bringing of a certain manufacturing or whatever it is, environmental projects or anti-environmental projects, they're going to go to their localities and they are basically opposing that government development that is private but is sponsored by the government. The drug cartels go and do the dirty work for them. In a way, there is a kind of complicity and an alliance between the drug cartels and this kind of neoliberal oligarchic development that is sponsored by the state. I've got a final question for you both and it emerges from a sense I have that there's a tendency to look at politics across South America as a kind of harbinger of a global situation in one way or another. This starts with the sociologist Ulrich Beck who coins the term Brazilianisation and this is a term that gets picked up and refers then to many different things, whether it's wage compression, a sort of centrifugal dissolution of the middle class, whether it's the rise of urban structures that include favelas or these sort of distributed zones of semi-sovereignty and whether it's clientelism in the structure of the state and so on and so on. I dislike the sort of implicit claim that politics comes to matter in Latin America only insofar as it tells us what politics is going to be like in the really important bit of the world, which is up here in the global north. But it does seem that there is something paradigm shaping about the way that politics is taking form in Latin America, whether that's the pliancy of the moderate right, whether it's the sort of violent and showman-like and very often anti-democratic features of the new far right. Are there hopeful elements to that picture as well? What seeds of optimism might there be in this harbinger of a new world? I'm going to start with Camila. That is a great question. I think for the Latin American experience is a great one in the sense that there's lots of revolutionary energy all around and we tend to see only the general trends and forget that there are things happening on the ground because there's lack of state. In a way, that kind of gray area in which creativity and spontaneity and transformation is possible. So basically, revolutionary tendencies and the new prefigurative tendencies for a new alternative future are seen in the periphery. I'm very hopeful in the sense that what we saw in Chile, even if it failed in terms of the constitutional change, the process itself revealed that an organization on the ground and with very little education, no funding whatsoever, allowed for common people to get together and draft constitutional articles together and really push forward to being included in the constitution. I was involved in the process and it was beautiful to see how this process is unfolded, things that I have read in books only. It was happening in real time. You can always say, well, there's no really funding, people are not experts, and that is not really necessary when you're thinking about transformation because the experts are experts in the current system and you need really to think outside the box to transition to a new place. So I think the lack of structures and the antagonism and the effervescence that comes from crisis and the dealing with crisis from Latin America can show us not only that there's a far right that is looming and is trying to take over, that's also we see in Europe and the United States, that's not new, but actually what is new that is coming from this periphery is this kind of revolutionary experiments that are really real, that we don't see them. There are not a lot of documentation about this, but there's lots of places, starting with the Zapatistas, of course, but many other places in Latin America that prompt the hope for a new future that is very different from the more social democrat and kind of restorative push of the left in Europe, I would say, and in the U.S. The idea that only if we get rid of the bad apples that have, you know, coming from the far right, we will be in good democratic standing again. I think Latin America, given that is the most unequal region in the world and that oligarchy is a permanent feature and the oppression of the many is a permanent feature, then it is more clear that the system of representative democracy that is very nationalized, that is very centralized and does not allow for a lot of participation or accountability of their elites is really sterile in a way, and then we need to break through that system and experiment with different forms of self-government and that basically caters to the local communities. I think that is what I would like to rescue, not only something that is going to happen now, I think, immediately is more like the backlash of the far right, when I think it's not new, but actually the experiment that could show us a different way of doing politics in a very deprived area. So we don't have, like in Europe, citizen assemblies with people that are experienced or, you know, have a job and they are middle class. We're talking about really precarious populations that through mutual aid and support and solidarity are able to engage in a system against all odds. Tony. Yeah, I think I would agree with a lot of what Camila just said about thinking of Latin America as a place of incredible political energies and consistently throwing up new forms and new ideas and new radical ways of rethinking the future. I think I've been thinking about what the nature of my objection to the Ulrich Beck Brazilianization thesis is, and I think part of my objection is not just the one you mentioned, James, about this is why this matters, but also because I think to some extent these are not temporarily sequential developments, that these are structurally connected, interconnected parts of the world and you just get different manifestations of the symptoms in Latin America from what's coming in Europe. And so I think it means we have to hold both parts of the picture in mind at the same time, but also be aware of what kinds of transformation we can expect in each of the parts of that picture. And, you know, the grounds for pessimism are certainly plenty at the moment, given this rise of the right we've been talking about, and also given the resources that these very entrenched oligarchies can call upon to defend and maintain their privileges, including, as we recently discussed, armed force, should that become necessary. But weighing against that, and this has been a consistent feature of Latin America and certainly in the latest period, is the speed with which these political dispensations, pressures on popular layers are rejected and rebelled against. And I think about, you know, we talk about the Pink Tide as this kind of successful rebellion against neoliberalism, but, you know, in a way we should also think of the Pink Tide as a kind of culminating moment in a much longer sequence that includes the Zapatistas' rebellion launched in 94, but a long work of preparation among communities in Chiapas went into that. We can also think of anti-austerity protests in Venezuela. The Caracasso of 1989 is really, you know, and that's barely, that's the same decade as the neoliberal reforms themselves were at their peak. So we can think about, in some ways, the grounds for optimism would be that a rebellion will not be long in coming. That is a great place for us to leave it. My thanks to Tony and Camila for being my guides to the Pink Tide and to the radical right in Latin America. And if you've enjoyed this podcast, why don't you go and rate us five stars wherever you get your podcasts. And indeed, if you've enjoyed this podcast, you would probably enjoy reading the London Review of Books. The new issue on newsstands and online now includes John Kerrigan on the Atlantic slave trade, David Ransomann on human extinction, and Donald McKenzie on why Google has got quite so bad. You know where to find it. Thanks for listening. We're smoking them out. They're running. And now we're going to bring them to justice. Aftershock, the war on terror is a new podcast from the London Review of Books. We did a whole lot of things that were right. Not only will we be judged by history, we tortured some folks, but we will be judged by God. Listen wherever you get your podcasts.